New Post:   Embedded Linux Logging Article (#644)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/_draft_linux_logging.md

#
# It will now show up in the front page when running Jekyll locally.

title: Embedded Linux Logging
description:
 "A look at embedded Linux logging challenges around collecting relevant kernel and user space information for device debugging while balancing flash wear and RAM pressure on resource-constrained devices."
author: grace
---

<!-- excerpt start -->

Embedded Linux offers developers a flexible platform to develop intricate and complex systems. By nature, embedded systems are memory and resource constrained and require more consideration around how to optimize usage of the resources that are available. When it comes to device observability in the field there are lots of questions around how to balance gathering enough critical information to debug systems without consuming too many resources and harming your overall system performance. This article will walk through various types of Embedded Linux logging platforms and consider various configurations to enhance device debugging without eating into your limited resource budget.

<!-- excerpt end -->

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

## Introduction to Embedded Linux Logging 

> Log messages are one of the most valuable tools an engineer has when debugging device issues, and they're typically the first place to go look when triaging a problem. As embedded systems are becoming more sophisticated, the logging architecture and design are playing a more critical role in overall system performance. Simply put, as compute is added more at the edge, log verbosity climbs, and memory writes climb with it. If this is not properly managed it can lead to overall degradation of your system's performance.

Reviewer: `Log messages are one of the most valuable tools an engineer has when debugging device issues, and they're typically the first place to go look when triaging a problem.`

This is counter to advice we generally give. I would rephrase that they are very valuable, not one of the most valuable.

It is a set of tradeoffs when gathering diagnostics data of your systems. If every single event is logged you will flood your memory with writes and hand the next engineer thousands of lines of logs to dig through to diagnose an issue. Conversely, if you log too little you are now left with nothing useful to further investigate an issue. These challenges are only amplified further when running on resource constrained devices. For embedded Linux devices, flash wear is a major concern to device longevity in the field. Every log line that reaches persistent storage is a write, and on NAND Flash/eMMC that starts to eat into your flash lifetime. 

## Why Logging Can Stress Your Device

Before diving into specific Linux logging mechanics, it's worth understanding how logging can impact flash wear and degrade device performance.

> Most embedded Linux systems use eMMC (Embedded MultiMediaCard) for persistent storage. eMMC consists of a flash controller that manages things like wear leveling and block management and a NAND flash memory that is exposed as `/dev/mmcblk0`. Unlike other memory storage devices, flash has a finite life, primarily gated by the amount of program/erase (P/E) cycles it has before it starts to have unpredictable storage behavior. Simply put, the more you read and write to your flash the quicker the flash wears out. To add to the complexity, not all writes to flash memory are the same. How much you write and the size of what you write directly impacts the flash wear. This concept is commonly known as write amplification factor (WAF), which is the ratio of physical bytes written versus the logical bytes your application actually needed to write to flash. Unsurprisingly, log messages, which are small, frequent writes by nature, have a very bad WAF. It is also worth noting the filesystem layer that is implemented also impacts log driven flash wear, but that won't be touched on in detail in this article. 

Reviewer: ` It is also worth noting the filesystem layer that is implemented also impacts log driven flash wear, but that won't be touched on in detail in this article. ` 

I would drop this sentence. I don't think it adds much, and feels more like a distraction.

> The other option is to just write all logs to RAM and prevent inducing any flash wear impact. However, if all logs are stored in RAM, none will persist after reboot and then you lose critical debug information when a system malfunctions. Embedded devices also have finite amounts of RAM, and writing to RAM is not free. If the logs start to use up too much of your RAM, the kernel is left to try its best to free up memory which can start to create performance latency in the device. Ultimately if memory pressure gets too tight the kernel will escalate to the OOM (out-of-memory) killer to try to kill off processes consuming too much RAM which can start causing all sorts of unpredictable device behavior. 

Reviewer: I would potentially mention a third option where we write to RAM, but either periodically flush to disk on rotate, or push up to the cloud.

BusyBox does offer the ability to configure the syslogd to only log messages into a small shared-memory ring buffer in RAM that you can leverage to read back with logread. The required configurations at compile time are shown below: 

```
 CONFIG_FEATURE_IPC_SYSLOG=y
 CONFIG_FEATURE_IPC_SYSLOG_BUFFER_SIZE=16
 CONFIG_LOGREAD=y
```
This can be invoked by running syslogd with -C flag. This capability allows you to clamp your RAM footprint to the buffer size only and gives you flexibility to implement your own log storage and forwarding functionality. The only caveat around this capability is that since it is a ring buffer on highly verbose systems the oldest entries will be lost and overwritten, but for some devices with limited memory space this is the best option available.

BusyBox syslogd also implements simple severity filtering (-l LEVEL), which drops anything less urgent than the given priority. But it has none of the content-based filtering or rate-limiting functionality that some of the larger daemons like rsyslog and syslog-ng provide.

> Since syslogd writes continuously to one file, syslogd should always be paired with some sort of log rotation utility to keep `/var/log` from growing without bounds. Most daemons have some level of log rotation included in the configuration but it is critical to set strict caps on maximum log size and age, compress and rotate the logs into persistent storage for debug capabilities. 

Reviewer 2: > Most daemons have some level of log rotation included in the configuration

since you're talking about `syslogd` here (which doesn't have rotation built in, that I know of, at least), I might say, something like:

> `syslogd` generally relies on `logrotate` for rotation, while other logging alternatives, like `newsyslog`, have it built in. Either way, it is critical...

> syslogd is a good fit for low-to-moderate verbosity systems with tight resource budgets. The limitations show up as verbosity climbs. If `/var/log` is mounted on flash, a noisy system wears the flash. Conversely, with `/var/log` on tmpfs, high volume logs can put pressure on RAM. Either way, if you need finer control over what gets written, you'll want to consider heavier log filtering layers or logs to metrics which can help alleviate some logging storage pressure. [^2]

Reviewer: `The limitations show up as verbosity climbs.`

This feels a little vague. What are the limitations. You expand a bit after, but this sentence feels too abrupt

	Port 5170
```

This current configuration ingests all the kernel logs hitting systemd, listens for logs that discuss things like power and battery channels, and pushes any relevant log to a tcp port. This is a very simple use of filtering, but can be quite powerful when compounded to different application logs entering the system. The various output configuration gives flexibility for other applications to ingest this information, who could do further log processing and/or send the critical logs up to the cloud for device monitoring purposes [^4]. 

### Logs to Metrics

The last note to consider around gathering critical information from your devices in the field is the idea of Logs to Metrics. What if, instead of storing hundreds of lines of logs for thousands of deployed devices in the field, you counted occurrences of the critical states the device enters? Instead of persisting every Ethernet TX failure as a log line that has to be searched and aggregated on the backend, you could just increment a counter each time this event occurs. Now you can answer questions like "How often is this issue happening?" and gauge issue severity without needing to store numerous log lines.

> Converting log events to metrics can allow you to listen and filter out textual noise to gain meaningful insights. Most of the log to metrics tools are simple to implement and require you to generate regex against incoming log lines. There are applications that exist that will hook into your logging daemon, and increment local metrics of critical events instead of (or in addition to) passing the log through. At this point, you can count the resulting metric that can be scraped or forwarded to whatever time-series/observability backend you use, giving a quick easy way to view failure rates without ever having stored the underlying text long-term.

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to cover these tools. You can do this in fluent-bit and memfaultd

---
# This is a template for Interrupt posts. Use previous, more recent posts from the _posts/
# directory for more inspiration and patterns.
#
# When submitting a post for publishing, submit a PR with the post in the _drafts/ directory
# and it will be moved to _posts/ on the date of publish.
#
# e.g.
# $ cp _drafts/_template.md _drafts/my_post.md
#
# It will now show up in the front page when running Jekyll locally.

title: Embedded Linux Logging
description:
 "A look at embedded Linux logging challenges around collecting relevant kernel and user space information for device debugging while balancing flash wear and RAM pressure on resource-constrained devices."
author: grace
---

<!-- excerpt start -->

> Embedded Linux offers developers a flexible platform to develop intricate and complex systems. By nature, embedded systems are memory and resource constrained and require more consideration around how to optimize usage of the resources that are available. When it comes to device observability in the field, there are lots of questions around how to balance gathering enough critical information to debug systems without consuming too many resources and harming your overall system performance. This article will walk through various types of embedded Linux logging platforms and consider various tradeoffs between logging storage media, compression, and verbosity to enhance device debugging without eating into your limited resource budget.

Reviewer 3: This excerpt (encapsulated with `<!-- excerpt start/end -->`) will render on the landing page of the blog, so we typically want 1-2 sentences max. I think this last sentence is great for an excerpt, so my suggestion is we move the start there

<!-- excerpt end -->

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

## Introduction to Embedded Linux Logging 

> Log messages are a valuable tool that an engineer has when debugging device issues, and they're typically a good first place to look when triaging a problem. As the complexity and number of devices enter the field, log files start to become cumbersome and hard to filter through to capture meaningful insights. Furthermore, as embedded systems are becoming more sophisticated, the logging architecture and design are playing a more critical role in overall system performance. Simply put, as compute is added more at the edge, log verbosity climbs, and memory writes climb with it. If this is not properly managed, it can lead to overall degradation of your system's performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Log messages are a valuable tool that an engineer has when debugging device issues, and they're typically a good first place to look when triaging a problem. As the complexity and number of devices entering the field increases, log files start to become cumbersome and hard to filter through to capture meaningful insights. Furthermore, as embedded systems are becoming more sophisticated, the logging architecture and design are playing a more critical role in overall system performance. Simply put, as compute is added more at the edge, log verbosity climbs, and memory writes climb with it. If this is not properly managed, it can lead to overall degradation of your system's performance.
```

BusyBox syslogd, by default, does not hold logs in a large in-memory buffer. Instead, it writes each message straight through to its log file `/var/log/messages` as it arrives. This means that where those writes actually go is entirely a function of where `/var/log` is mounted, either on persistent storage, where every log line is pushed to the cache for a flash write, or on tmpfs as a RAM write that won't survive a reboot. 

BusyBox does offer the ability to configure syslogd to only log messages into a small shared-memory ring buffer in RAM that you can leverage to read back with logread. The required configurations at compile time are shown below: 

> ```

Reviewer 3: we can format these as bash I think:

```suggestion
```bash
```

 CONFIG_LOGREAD=y
```
This can be invoked by running syslogd with the `-C` flag. This capability allows you to clamp your RAM footprint to the buffer size only and gives you flexibility to implement your own log storage and forwarding functionality. The only caveat around this capability is that, since it is a ring buffer, on highly verbose systems the oldest entries will be lost and overwritten, but for some devices with limited memory space, this is the best option available.

BusyBox syslogd also implements simple severity filtering (-l LEVEL), which drops anything less urgent than the given priority. But it has none of the content-based filtering or rate-limiting functionality that some of the larger daemons like rsyslog and syslog-ng provide.

Since syslogd writes continuously to one file, syslogd should always be paired with some sort of log rotation utility to keep `/var/log` from growing without bounds. Busybox syslogd does include some rotation ability, but generally speaking, syslogd relies on logrotate for rotation. Either way, it is critical to set strict caps on maximum log size and age, compress and rotate the logs into persistent storage for debugging purposes. 

> syslogd is a good fit for low-to-moderate verbosity systems with tight resource budgets; however, due to syslogd's limited configuration capabilities, its performance is not as desirable as some other logging systems that have finer filtering and rotation capabilities configured out of the box. If `/var/log` is mounted on flash, a noisy system will wear the flash. Conversely, with `/var/log` on tmpfs, high-volume logs can put pressure on RAM. Either way, if you need finer control over what gets written, you'll want to consider heavier log filtering layers or logs to metrics, which can help alleviate some logging storage pressure. [^2]

Reviewer 3: nit: I think moving the footnote to the first reference of busybox is better?

As mentioned before, for embedded Linux, `/var` is most likely mounted to `tmpfs`, so it is always worth confirming your mounting scheme is configured as desired. Storing logs in volatile storage is the strongest wear-reduction option available if you don't need logs to survive a reboot, as RAM writes cost zero flash P/E cycles. However, for the majority of logging use cases, this won't gather meaningful insights on what your system is doing and defeats the purpose of including logs in the program in the first place. If you are using other log forwarding to cloud storage, or logs to metrics, then you may be able to leverage either `none` or `volatile` storage, since most of your logs will be stored off device. 

Enforcing size limits on your log files will directly impact how much you are storing. Things like **`Compress=`** will reduce the physical bytes written for the same logical log volume. Utilizing configurations like **`SystemMaxUse=` / `RuntimeMaxUse=`** provides hard caps on the overall size impact in Flash + RAM. Other configurations for tweaking the overall storage strategy of these logs can be found in journald.conf. 

> journald also includes rate limiting and write amplification optimizations. The **`SyncIntervalSec=`** batches writes and doesn't `fsync()` on every message, except for the CRIT/ALERT/EMERG messages. A longer sync interval typically means, on average, fewer, larger physical writes for the same log volume, which will correlate with less flash wear impact, at the cost of losing more of the tail of the log if power is lost between syncs. The **`RateLimitIntervalSec=` / `RateLimitBurst=`** cap how many messages per interval will get accepted by journald at all, so a single noisy service can't flood your logs with useless information [^3].

Reviewer 3: same footnote comment as ^2
